
# Input and Output Management

Input and output management in Linux is essential for controlling where data goes (output) and where it comes from (input). uses **standard input (stdin)** and **standard output (stdout)** for communication between commands, files, and the terminal.

### 1. Standard Output (stdout)
Standard output is the default destination where a command sends its results (usually your terminal).
- **`echo`**: Prints text to standard output.
   ```bash
   echo "Hello, World!"
   ```
   Output:
   ```
   Hello, World!
   ```
- **`>`**: Redirect standard output to a file (overwrites the file).
  ```bash
  echo "Hello, World!" > output.txt   # Write "Hello, World!" to output.txt
  ```
  > If `output.txt` already exists, its content will be replaced with "Hello, World!"
  
- **`>>`**: Append standard output to a file (does not overwrite).
  ```bash
  echo "Hello, again!" >> output.txt   # Add "Hello, again!" to output.txt
  ```
  > If output.txt already exists, "Hello, again!" will be added to the end of the file without deleting the existing content.

  ```bash
  cat output.txt
  ```
  Output
  ```
  Hello, World!
  Hello, again!
  ```
### 2. Standard Input (stdin)
Standard input is the default location where commands receive their input.

- **`cat`**: Reads input from the keyboard or a file and prints it to the terminal.
 ```bash
   cat < file.txt
 ```
This reads the content of `file.txt` and displays it.
   
- **`read`**: Reads input from the user.
```bash
read name
```
Input:
```
Noura
```

```bash
 echo "Hello, $name!"
```
 Output:
```
Hello, Noura!
```

### 3. Combining Input and Output
You can combine redirection for input and output.

- The content of `input.txt` is copied into `output.txt`.
   ```bash
   cat < input.txt > output.txt
   ```

### 4. Piping
Piping `|` allows you to send the output of one command as input to another.

   ```bash
   cat output.txt | wc -l   
   ```
> Count the number of lines in a file. The pipe `|` takes the output of `cat output.txt` and feeds it as input to the `wc -l` command.

   Output:
   ```
   2
   ```
> We use the first file `output.txt` 
