# Network Management 
Network management is a critical skill for any computer specialist. Whether you want to analyze a network or interact with web servers, Linux provides a rich set of command-line tools for managing, analyzing, and troubleshooting network connectivity.

## Connectivity and Packet Analysis Commands

## Network Management Commands

## Domain Name Server Commands
### What is the Domain Name System(DNS)?

It is the component of the internet standard protocol responsible for converting the human-friendly domain names like www.google.com into IP addresses like 142.250.72.68 that computers use to communicate. This means that using either the IP address or the hostname in your web browser will generally result in retrieving the same web page, since both point to the same server.

Linux provides several commands to query DNS information and interact with web servers. Below are the most common commands and their usage.




 ### 1. DNS Lookup with `host`
The `host` command performs DNS lookups, translating domain names to IP addresses and vice versa.
```
host google.com
```
**Sample Output:**
```
google.com has address 142.250.75.78
google.com has IPv6 address 2a00:1450:4028:805::200e
google.com mail is handled by 10 smtp.google.com.
google.com has HTTP service bindings 1 . alpn="h2,h3"
````
- **Address**: Shows the IPv4 address for the domain.
- **IPv6 address**: Shows the IPv6 address if available.
- **Mail server (MX record)**: Indicates which server handles email for the domain.
- **HTTP service bindings**: Lists supported protocols (e.g., HTTP/2, HTTP/3).


**Reverse DNS Lookup (IP to Domain):**
```
host 142.250.75.78
```
**Sample Output:**
```
78.75.250.142.in-addr.arpa domain name pointer tztlva-ab-in-f14.1e100.net.
```
- **78.75.250.142.in-addr.arpa**: This is the reverse DNS query for the IP address.
- **domain name pointer tztlva-ab-in-f14.1e100.net**: This is the PTR (pointer) record, which maps the IP address back to a domain name.
- **1e100.net**: This domain is owned by Google, indicating its IP address is part of Google’s network.

> [!NOTE]
> Reverse DNS results for large companies like Google can change frequently. You may see different pointer records depending on your location and timing.

### 2. Name Server Lookup with `nslookup`
`nslookup` is a command-line tool used to query DNS servers for information about domains or IP addresses.
```
nslookup google.com
```
**Sample Output:**
```
Server:		127.0.0.53
Address:	127.0.0.53#53

Non-authoritative answer:
Name:	google.com
Address: 142.250.75.110
Name:	google.com
Address: 2a00:1450:4028:800::200e

```
- **Server**: The DNS server your system is using.
- **Non-authoritative answer**: A valid DNS response, but not directly from the source server.
- **Name**: The domain queried.
- **Address**: The IP addresses returned for the domain (IPv4 and IPv6).


**Interactive Mode:**
```
nslookup
> set type=MX
> google.com
```
**Sample Output:**
```
Server:		127.0.0.53
Address:	127.0.0.53#53

Non-authoritative answer:
google.com	mail exchanger = 10 smtp.google.com.

Authoritative answers can be found from:
smtp.google.com	internet address = 64.233.166.27
smtp.google.com	internet address = 64.233.167.26
smtp.google.com	internet address = 74.125.71.27
smtp.google.com	internet address = 64.233.166.26
smtp.google.com	internet address = 64.233.167.27
smtp.google.com	has AAAA address = 2a00:1450:400c:c09::1a
smtp.google.com	has AAAA address = 2a00:1450:400c:c0a::1b
smtp.google.com	has AAAA address = 2a00:1450:400c:c0a::1a
smtp.google.com	has AAAA address = 2a00:1450:400c:c09::1b
```
- **google.com  mail exchanger = 10 smtp.google.com.**: MX record is an email for google.com is handled by smtp.google.com, preference value 10.
- **Authoritative answers can be found from**: Lists the real IP addresses (IPv4 and IPv6) for the mail server smtp.google.com.

>[!IMPORTANT]
> Press **Ctrl+C** to exit interactive mode.

### 3. Detailed DNS Query with `dig`
The `dig` (Domain Information Groper) command provides detailed DNS query information.
```
dig google.com
```

**Sample Output:**
```
; <<>> DiG 9.20.11-1ubuntu2-Ubuntu <<>> google.com
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 44070
;; flags: qr rd ra; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 1, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; ENDS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 65494
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;google.com.      IN     A

;; ANSWER SECTION:
google.com.   29   IN   A   142.250.201.14

;; Query time: 80 msec
;; SERVER: 127.0.0.53#53(127.0.0.53)(UDP)
;; WHEN: Wed Oct 22 14:00:00 UTC 2025
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 55
```
- The first line displays the `dig` command version.
- **HEADER** section in the dig output summarizes the DNS query and response, detailing the query type, response status, and flags for key attributes. It also shows counts for questions, answers, authoritative records, and additional records in the response.
- **OPT PSEUDOSECTION** displays advanced data:
  - **EDNS**: Extension system for DNS, if used.
  - **flags**: Specified flags. In this case, it's blank because no flags were specified.
  - **udp**: udp packet size.
- **QUESTION SECTION** displays the query data that was sent:
  - The first column is the domain name queried.
  - The second column is the query type (IN = Internet).
  - The third column specifies the record (A = Address) unless otherwise specified.
- **ANSWER SECTION** the most important section:
  - The first column lists the name of the server that was queried.
  - The second column is the Time to Live, a set timeframe after which the record is refreshed.
  - The third column is the query type (IN = Internet).
  - The fourth column specifies the record (A = Address).
  - The final column displays the IP address associated with the domain name.
- The **statistics section** shows metadata about the query:
  - **Query time**: The amount of time it took for a response.
  - **SERVER**: The responding DNS server IP address and port.
  - **WHEN**: The time when the command was run.
  - **MSG SIZE rcvd**: The size of the reply from the DNS server.
>[!TIP]
> You can specify the record type (e.g., MX for mail): `dig google.com MX`


**Find Only the Answer (just the IP address):**
```
dig +short google.com 
```
```
142.250.201.14
```
## Interacting with Web Servers

### 1. Fetching Web Pages with `curl`
`curl` is a command-line tool for transferring data to or from a server, commonly used to fetch web pages or APIs.

> [!NOTE]
> You may need to install it first: `sudo apt install curl`


**Fetch a Webpage by Hostname**
To fetch the contents of a web page using its hostname:
```
curl https://www.google.com
```
- Displays the raw HTML returned by the server.

**Fetch a Webpage by IP Address**

You can also access a website by its IP address.

First, find the IP using a DNS command such as `host` or `dig`. Then use `curl` with the IP address and specify the Host header since many web servers host multiple sites.

```
curl http://142.250.201.14 -H "Host: www.google.com"
```
- The `-H` option sets the **Host** header, telling the server which website you want. If not set, you may get an error or a default page.
- This should return the same HTML output as using the hostname.

### 2. Checking HTTP Headers Only
To fetch just the HTTP headers (for debugging or information), use the option `I`.
```
curl -I www.google.com
```
- Displays metadata about the response, including status code, headers, content type, content length, and  other server details.


### 3. Downloading Files with `curl`
You can use curl to download files, such as images, scripts, documents, or the output.

**Download and Keep Original Filename**
```
curl -O http://www.google.com/image.png
```
 - The `-O` option saves the file with its original name.

**Download and Rename the File**
```
curl https://www.google.com -o google.html
```
- The `-o` option lets you specify the filename after the option.


### 4. Send Data to a Server
Websites often require users to submit data (e.g., for login forms). You can do this with `curl`.

**Send Data Directly**
Suppose a website expects two fields: username and password.
```
curl -d "username=myuser&password=mypass" https://example.com/login
```
- `-d` tells `curl` to send the provided string as data to the server.
- The string is formatted like a web form: field1=value1&field2=value2.

**Send Data from a File**

If you have a lot of data, you can write it in a file (e.g., data.txt) and send it like this:
```
curl -d @data.txt https://example.com/submit
```
- The `@` symbol tells `curl` to read the data from the specified file.

